.TH mount.crypt 8 "2008\-10\-08" "pam_mount" "pam_mount"
.SH Name
mount.crypt - mount a dm\-crypt encrypted volume
.SH Syntax
\fBmount.crypt\fP [\fB-nr\fP] [\fB\-o\fP \fIoptions\fP]
\fIdevice\fP \fIdirectory\fP
.SH Options
.TP
\fB\-o\fP \fIoptions\fP
Set further mount options. mount.crypt will take out its own options it
recognizes and passes any remaining options on to the underlying mount
program. See below for possible options.
.TP
\fB\-n\fP
Do not update /etc/mtab. Note that this makes it impossible to unmount the
volume by naming the container - you will have to pass the mountpoint to
umount.crypt.
.TP
\fB\-r\fP
Set up the loop device (if necessary) and crypto device in read-only mode.
(The mount itself will necessarily also be read-only.) Note that doing a
remount using `mount /mnt -o remount,rw` will \fBnot\fP make the mount
readwrite. The crypto and loop devices will have to be disassociated first.
.SH Mount options
.TP
\fBcipher\fP
The cryptsetup cipher used for the encrypted volume. This option is mandatory.
pmt-ehd(8) defaults to creating volumes with "aes\-cbc\-essiv:sha256" as a
cipher.
.TP
\fBdm\-timeout=\fP\fIseconds\fP
Wait at most this many seconds for udev to create /dev/mapper/\fIname\fP after
calling cryptsetup(8). The default value is 0 seconds.
.TP
\fBfsk_cipher\fP
The OpenSSL cipher used for the filesystem key. The default is "aes\-256\-cbc".
.TP
\fBfsk_hash\fP
The OpenSSL hash used for producing key and IV. The default is "md5".
.TP
\fBfstype\fP
The exact type of filesystem in the encrypted container. The default is to let
the kernel autodetect.
.TP
\fBkeyfile\fP
The path to the key file. This option is mandatory for "normal" crypto volumes
and should not be used for LUKS volumes.
.TP
\fBro\fP
Same as the \fB-r\fP option.
.SH Authors
This manpage was originally written by Bastian Kleineidam <calvin@debian.org>
for the Debian distribution of pam_mount (libpam\-mount) but may be used by
others.

See /usr/share/doc/packages/pam_mount/AUTHORS for the list of original authors
of pam_mount.
