.TH pam_mount 8
.SH NAME
.PP
pam_mount - A PAM module that can mount volumes for a user session
.SH OVERVIEW
.PP
This module is aimed at environments with central file servers that a user
wishes to mount on login and unmount on logout, such as (semi-)diskless
stations where many users can logon and where statically mounting the entire
/home from a server is a security risk, or listing all possible volumes in
/etc/fstab is not feasible.
.IP "\(bu" 4
Users can define their own list of volumes without having to change
(possibly non-writable) global config files.
.IP "\(bu" 4
Single sign-on feature - the user needs to type the password just once
(at login)
.IP "\(bu" 4
Transparent mount process
.IP "\(bu" 4
No stored passwords
.IP "\(bu" 4
Volumes are unmounted on logout, freeing system resources and
not leaving data exposed.
.PP
The module also supports mounting local filesystems of any kind the normal
mount utility supports, with extra code to make sure certain volumes are set up
properly because often they need more than just a mount call, such as encrypted
volumes. This includes SMB/CIFS, NCP, FUSE, dm-crypt and LUKS.
.PP
If you intend to use pam_mount to protect volumes on your computer using an
encrypted filesystem system, please know that there are many other issues you
need to consider in order to protect your data. For example, you probably want
to disable or encrypt your swap partition (the cryptoswap can help you do
this). Do not assume a system is secure without carefully considering potential
threats.
.SH NASTY DETAILS
.PP
The primary configuration file for the pam_mount module is pam_mount.conf.xml.
On most platforms this file is read from /etc/security/pam_mount.conf.xml. On
OpenBSD pam_mount reads its configuration file from /etc/pam_mount.conf.xml.
pam_mount.conf.xml contains many comments documenting its use.
.PP
In addition, you must include two entries in the system's applicable
/etc/pam.d/\fIservice\fP config files, as the following example shows:
.IP
.nf
    auth     required  pam_securetty.so
    auth     required  pam_pwdb.so shadow nullok
    auth     required  pam_nologin.so
+++ auth     optional  pam_mount.so try_first_pass
    account  required  pam_pwdb.so
    password required  pam_cracklib.so
    password required  pam_pwdb.so shadow nullok use_authtok
    session  required  pam_pwdb.so
    session  optional  pam_console.so
+++ session  optional  pam_mount.so
.fi
.PP
When "sufficient" is used in the second column, you must make sure that
pam_mount is added before this entry. Otherwise pam_mount will not get executed
should a previous PAM module succeed. Also be aware of the "include"
statements. These make PAM look into the specified file. If there is a
"sufficient" statement, then the pam_mount entry must either be in the included
file before the "sufficient" statement or before the "include" statement.
.PP
If you use pam_ldap, pam_winbind, or any other authentication services that
make use of PAM's sufficient keyword, model your configuration on the
following order:
.IP
.nf
\(bu\(bu\(bu
account sufficient  pam_ldap.so
auth    required    pam_mount.so
auth    sufficient  pam_ldap.so use_first_pass
auth    required    pam_unix.so use_first_pass
session optional    pam_mount.so
\(bu\(bu\(bu
.fi
.PP
This allows for:
.IP "1." 4
pam_mount, as the first "auth" module, will prompt for a password and export it
to the PAM system.
.IP "2." 4
pam_ldap will use the password from the PAM system to try and authenticate the
user. If this succedes, the user will be authenticated. If it fails, pam_unix
will try to authenticate.
.IP "3." 4
pam_unix will try to authenticate the user if pam_ldap failed. If pam_unix
fails, then the authentication will be refused (due to the "required").
.PP
Alternatively, the following is possible (thanks to Andrew Morgan for
the hint!):
.IP
.nf
auth [success=2 default=ignore] pam_unix2.so
auth [success=1 default=ignore] pam_ldap.so use_first_pass
auth requisite pam_deny.so
auth optional pam_mount.so use_first_pass
.fi
.PP
It may seem odd, but the first three lines will make it so that at least one of
pam_unix2 or pam_ldap has to succeed. As you can see, pam_mount will be run
\fBafter\fR successful authentification with these subsystems.
.PP
If your volume has a different password than your system account, then encrypt
the password to the volume you wish mounted using your system password as the
key and store it somewhere on your system's local filesystem. pam_mount
supports transparently decrypting this filesystem key, as long as the cipher
used is supported by openssl. Given:
.TP
\fIsk\fP
system key, the key or password used to log into the system
.TP
\fIfsk\fP
filesystem key, the key that allows you to use the filesystem you wish pam_mount to mount for you
.TP
\fIE and D\fP
an openssl supported synchronous encryption/decryption algorithm
.TP
\fIefsk\fP
encrypted filesystem key, efsk = E_sk (fsk), stored somewhere on the local filesystem (ie: /home/user.key)
.PP
pam_mount will read efsk from the local filesystem, perform fsk = D_sk (efsk)
and use fsk to mount the filesystem. If you change your system password, simply
regenerate efsk using efsk = E_sk (fsk). If you want to mount this volume by
hand, use something like `openssl enc \-d \-aes\-256\-ecb \-in /home/user.key |
mount \-p0 /home/user`. More information about this technique is included in
pam_mount.conf.xml.
.PP
A script named mkehd is provided with pam_mount to help create encrypted home
directories. If you have an entry for a user using encrypted home directories
in pam_mount.conf.xml, mkehd will create necessary filesystem images and
possibly encrypted filesystem keys.
.PP
Individual users may define additional volumes to mount if allowed by
pam_mount.conf.xml (usually ~/.pam_mount.conf.xml). The volume keyword is the
only valid keyword in these per\-user configuration files. If the luserconf
parameter is set in pam_mount.conf.xml, allowing user\-defined volume, then
users may mount and unmount any volume they own at any mount point they own. On
some filesystem configurations this may be a security flaw so user\-defined
volumes are not allowed by the example pam_mount.conf.xml distributed with
pam_mount.
.PP
In general, you will leave all the first (general) parameters as provided by
default. You only have to provide the user/volume list in the end of the file,
following the examples.
.PP
To ensure that your system and, possibly, the remote server are all properly
configured, you should try to mount all or some of the volumes by hand, using
the same commands and mount points provided in pam_mount.conf.xml. This will
save you a lot of grief, since it is more difficult to debug the mounting
process via pam_mount.
.PP
If you can mount the volumes by hand but it is not happening via pam_mount, you
may want to enable the "debug" option in pam_mount.conf.xml to see what is
happening.
.PP
Verify if the user owns the mount point and has sufficient permissions over
that. pam_mount will verify this and will refuse to mount the remote volume if
the user does not own that directory.
.PP
If pam_mount is having trouble unmounting volumes upon logging out, enable the
debug variable. This causes pam_mount to run ofl on logout and write its output
to the system's log.
.SH AUTHORS
.PP
W. Michael Petullo <mike@flyn.org>
.PP
Jan Engelhardt <jengelh [at] medozas de> (current maintainer)
